scenes conditioned on latent embeddings from a fractal process. All images and maps shown above are synthesized with DreamSea.
realistic seafloor images in RGBD channels, conditioned on
as depth sensors and LiDARs commonly do not work well
can be hypothesized that the training data for underwater
Three-dimensional scenes are often represented as point
train the image diffusion model conditioned on DINO v2
tent space. Depth Anything v2 [32] is a depth foundation
model that predicts depth from RGB images. In many cases
this is used to generate RGB+Depth (RGBD) images from
lected from underwater surveys, we generate depth channels and
lows. In Sec. 3.1, we outline the extraction of relative depth
3.1. 3D Structure from Depth Foundation Model
seek to incorporate depth into the diffusion-based gener-
In this paper, we use the depth foundation model, Depth
Anything v2 [32], to generate a depth map from 2D image
data. Depth foundation models are good at predicting the
relative depth distribution in single frames. We normalize
this prediction to [0,1]. In this work, we consider depths up
to a scale factor, and do not require absolute metric depth.
or classic stereo-matching methods. Estimated depths are
used as additional channels for the real-world training data.
sual model, DINO v2 [20], to extract zero-shot features
generate DINO v2 features and then apply Principal Com-
dimensional features to the low-dimensional space. This
reduced dimensional feature vector then acts as a descrip-
tures onto a low-dimension space. Early work by Zhang et
After obtaining a reduced-dimensional feature vector for
ture vectors, to generate both RGB and depth images.Let us denote the feature vector as
ϕ←PCA(DINOv2 (I)), (1)
where Iis an image and PCA(DINOv2 (·))indicates apply-
ing PCA to the feature vector outputted by the DINO model,
reducing dimensionality. During inference, our conditional
where dis the dimensionality of the latent vector after PCA
depth generated using Depth Anything v2 [32]. The result-
We begin by using the depth channels from the gener-
Herepiis initialized from the depths of the generated im-
the geometry with an up-to-scale depth diffusion model is
GPU with 24GB VRAM for 2000 epochs, with a batch size
of 12. Although the size of each data set differs, it usually
the resolution of 224×224. We use the first two main com-
ponents from PCA results on DINO v2 embeddings. From
well, as shown in Figure 7. The generated relative depth
from the depth foundation model.
well as depth estimation distilled from depth anything v2 [32].
Figure 9. Examples of image generation conditioned on interpolated DINO embeddings. A smooth transition can be observed.
Table 1. MSE ↓on CLIP [25]/DINO [20] embedding space eval-
control accuracy by evaluating the CLIP and DINO latent of
generated image patches (Reference embedding of DINO is
be synthesized into our map, creating more realistic appear-
suals and estimated depths are integrated as priors to con-
large-scale three-dimensional reconstructions from underwa-
otr Bojanowski. DINOv2: Learning robust visual features
without supervision. Transactions on Machine Learning Re-
[22] Ken Perlin. An image synthesizer. In Proceedings of the
Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representa-
Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning
sion. In International conference on machine learning , pages
Patrick Esser, and Bj ¨orn Ommer. High-resolution image
ference on Learning Representations . 3
benchmarking and robust learning for noise-free ego-motion
gang Xu, Jiashi Feng, and Hengshuang Zhao. Depth any-
[35] Tianyi Zhang and Matthew Johnson-Roberson. Learning
underwater: Learning neural reflectance fields for true color
Learning neural reflectance fields for true color correction
Johnson-Roberson. Darkgs: Learning neural illumination