Infinite Leagues Under the Sea: Photorealistic 3D Underwater Terrain
Generation by Latent Fractal Diffusion Models
Tianyi Zhang
 Weiming Zhi
 Joshua Mangelson
 Matthew Johnson-Roberson
Carnegie Mellon University
 Brigham Young University
tianyiz4@andrew.cmu.edu
Figure 1. Underwater 3D terrain generation: Given 2D images of the real world seafloor collected by robots, DreamSea distills 3D
geometry and semantic information from visual foundation models and trains a diffusion model that generates realistic 3D underwater
scenes conditioned on latent embeddings from a fractal process. All images and maps shown above are synthesized with DreamSea.
Abstract
This paper tackles the problem of generating representa-
tions of underwater 3D terrain. Off-the-shelf generative
models, trained on Internet-scale data but not on special-
ized underwater images, exhibit downgraded realism, as
images of the seafloor are relatively uncommon. To this
end, we introduce DreamSea , a generative model to gener-
ate hyper-realistic underwater scenes. DreamSea is trained
on real-world image databases collected from underwater
robot surveys. Images from these surveys contain massive
real seafloor observations and covering large areas, but are
prone to noise and artifacts from the real world. We extract3D geometry and semantics from the data with visual foun-
dation models, and train a diffusion model that generates
realistic seafloor images in RGBD channels, conditioned on
novel fractal distribution-based latent embeddings. We then
fuse the generated images into a 3D map, building a 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) model supervised by 2D diffu-
sion priors which allows photorealistic novel view render-
ing. DreamSea is rigorously evaluated, demonstrating the
ability to robustly generate large-scale underwater scenes
that are consistent, diverse, and photorealistic. Our work
drives impact in multiple domains, spanning filming, gam-
ing, and robot simulation.
1arXiv:2503.06784v1  [cs.GR]  9 Mar 2025
1. Introduction
Scene generation is widely studied today, with deep neu-
ral networks capable of creating realistic 3D environments
trained on large-scale visual data. This technology has a sig-
nificant impact across various fields, including the film and
gaming industries, as well as robotics and autonomous ve-
hicle simulations. In this paper, we explore the application
of deep generative models to the unique setting of underwa-
ter environments. Without sufficient data and annotations,
the following questions for underwater scene generation re-
mains open:
• What kind of data can we use to train an underwater gen-
erative model?
• How can we train the underwater 3D generative model
without 3D scans?
• How can we control the sampling process while the data
come with no captions or annotations?
• How can we generate underwater terrain with natural-
looking variation in appearance?
• What techniques can we use from off-the-shelf 3D gener-
ative models and what is lacking in current open-source
models?
In this work, we tackle the problem from the perspective
of robot perception. Underwater robots and autonomous
underwater vehicles (AUVs) are designed to travel long
distances under the sea, maintaining altitude and route to
survey the designated area autonomously [9, 40]. Com-
pared to typical images and videos on the Internet, under-
water robotic images cover much larger areas of the ter-
rain. However, the massive amounts of data collected by
underwater robots present unique challenges: It is difficult
to acquire 3D information directly from sensory streams,
as depth sensors and LiDARs commonly do not work well
underwater. In addition, natural water bodies are highly dy-
namic, and visibility is low as a result of light scattering
and absorption in the medium. Therefore, Structure-from-
Motion (SfM) [1] and Simultaneous Localization and Map-
ping (SLAM) [19, 28] solutions have unstable performance.
As a result, a significant amount of robotic data comes with
no camera poses, and the cost of expert annotation is ex-
tremely high.
This paper introduces DreamSea , a diffusion-based gen-
erative model that can infinitely generate photorealistic 3D
underwater scenes. DreamSea is trained on RGB images
captured by underwater robots without any 3D sensory
information, SfM poses or human annotations. After
training, scenes generated by DreamSea are spatially con-
sistent in geometry with natural-looking variations in ap-
pearance. The contributions of this paper are as follows:
1. A novel approach that leverages a fractal distribution of
latent embeddings to control the appearance of generated
terrains;
2. Integration of visual foundation models (VFMs) on un-
Figure 2. Off-the-shelf solution for generating underwater scenes:
ChatGPT and SORA are able to generate scenes with diverse
appearances, but present heavy artificial effects even though
prompted with the “photorealistic style” keyword. Simulation en-
vironments [29] based on classic rendering pipelines, e.g. UNav-
Sim [2] and Infinigen [26], present limited performance when gen-
erating diverse and uncommon 3D assets.
seen underwater images to exploit semantic and 3D ge-
ometric information for scene generation; and
3. A pipeline that integrates the state-of-the-art de-
velopments image diffusion, inpainting, VFMs and
3DGS [11], to allow the generation of photorealistic 3D
terrains from unannotated images.
2. Related Work
2.1. Procedural Terrain Generation
Early studies on procedural terrain generation focus on gen-
erating elevation maps that resemble the 3D structure of
real-world terrain [18]. In particular, explicit mathemati-
cal models such as fractional Brownian motion (fBm) [16],
the diamond square algorithm [5], and Perlin noise [22] are
commonly used to approximate natural variations. Mod-
ern approaches have enabled the generation of 3D scenes
consisting of a variety of assets procedurally and rendered
with photorealistic quality [26]. Similar procedural strate-
gies have also been applied to generate room layouts [4]
and object-level [7] layouts that can be used to train em-
bodied AI algorithms. However, those modern approaches
are based on pre-modeled 3D assets. While it is feasible to
specify these assets in advance for commonly seen objects
and scenes, e.g. indoor environment, this is not the case for
unseen environments such as the deep sea. When apply-
ing the contemporary procedural generator Infingen [26] to
the underwater domain, the resulting generated scenes are
filled with repeated assets with lower rendering quality than
scenes generated in more typical domains. We illustrate at-
tempts to generate underwater scenes using large off-the-
shelf models in Figure 2.
2.2. Deep Generative Models
Given an image dataset, an image generation model learns
the distribution of this dataset. Unseen image samples can
be generated as samples drawn from this distribution. Early
techniques such as Variational Autoencoders (V AEs) [12]
and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [6] are able
to generate realistic images. In recent years, models such as
DDPM [8], Stable Diffusion [27] and DiT [21] allow high-
2
quality generation that can be conditioned on language in-
puts. These technologies have also led to commercialized
models such as ChatGPT and SORA. While these models
are capable of creating arbitrary scenes, we find, empiri-
cally, that the quality of generated underwater scenes is sig-
nificantly lower than other more common environments. It
can be hypothesized that the training data for underwater
scenes is scarce and unbalanced. The development of spe-
cialized models with curated data for underwater scenes is
still an open problem. In this work, our DreamSea model
leverages a DDPM [8] network with the RePaint [15] frame-
work as a backbone image generation and inpainting model.
2.3. 3D Scene Representation and Generation
Three-dimensional scenes are often represented as point
clouds, meshes or implicit functions, and generative models
can be trained on 3D datasets such as ScanNet [3] to create
3D assets and scenes. Recent advancements in neural radi-
ance fields (NeRFs) [17] techniques enable 3D scene recon-
struction with photorealistic quality by optimizing directly
over photometric loss. Building upon NeRFs, 3DGS [11]
developed an explicit representation which enables efficient
training and rendering at 100+ fps, making it a great fit for
creating 3D scenes and simulating robot perception [34]. It
is common to use 2D diffusion priors to support generation
of 3D assets either using NeRFs [23] or 3DGS [30, 33].
2.4. Visual Foundation Models
Underwater robotic field tests typically result in massive
amounts of images that are extremely challenging to an-
notate and often lack 3D information. In this work, we
leverage visual foundation models, which are trained on
internet-scale data to infer semantic and geometric infor-
mation by the images collected by our robots. CLIP [25]
is a vision-language model (VLM) trained on internet-scale
image-caption pairs and generalizes to unseen images. DI-
NOv2 [20] is another foundation model that encodes an
RGB image in a vector representation. In this work, we
train the image diffusion model conditioned on DINO v2
representations, so the diffusion can be controlled in the la-
tent space. Depth Anything v2 [32] is a depth foundation
model that predicts depth from RGB images. In many cases
this is used to generate RGB+Depth (RGBD) images from
RGB image inputs. Using foundation models in a zero-shot
manner is widespread in fields such as robotics [41, 42],
where labels are not abundant.
3. DreamSea
At the center of DreamSea is a terrain generation model that
varies in spatial coordinates. This model can then generate
a set of consistent images spanning a desired spatial region,
which can be used to construct 3DGS representations. Par-
ticular care needs to be taken to ensure that the generated
Figure 3. Overview of Training: Given RGB-only images col-
lected from underwater surveys, we generate depth channels and
embeddings with visual foundation models [20, 32]. A DDPM
network is then trained with an RGBD image as input conditioned
on embeddings.
images reflect both the biological and landscape diversity
of marine environments, while being spatially-consistent.
This section elaborates on the design consideration and
methodology details of DreamSea, and is structured as fol-
lows. In Sec. 3.1, we outline the extraction of relative depth
from diverse underwater data from different expeditions. In
Sec. 3.2, we introduce our diffusion-based generative model
that is conditioned on zero-shot visual features , enabling the
controlled generation on varied underwater environments.
In Sec. 3.3, we introduce our novel fractal-based generation
approach, which enables a set of spatially consistent under-
water images to be generated and allows explicit control of
the diversity of the generated terrain. Finally, in Sec. 3.4,
we leverage the terrain generated by our generative model to
construct a 3DGS representation supervised by the 2D dif-
fusion prior. An overview of our training procedure is out-
lined in Figure 3, and the generation procedure is sketched
in Figure 4.
3.1. 3D Structure from Depth Foundation Model
To build more consistent 3D structures underwater, we
seek to incorporate depth into the diffusion-based gener-
ative model. This, however, can be challenging. While
traditional 3D reconstruction and mapping methods such
as SfM and SLAM have been demonstrated on underwater
data, the community struggles to scale up the application of
these methods due to challenging underwater environments.
These challenges often manifest via low visibility, dynamic
surroundings, heavy motion blur under low light, and dif-
ferent sensor set-ups between expeditions to collect data.
In this paper, we use the depth foundation model, Depth
Anything v2 [32], to generate a depth map from 2D image
data. Depth foundation models are good at predicting the
relative depth distribution in single frames. We normalize
this prediction to [0,1]. In this work, we consider depths up
to a scale factor, and do not require absolute metric depth.
The metric scale can be recovered with additional sensors
or classic stereo-matching methods. Estimated depths are
used as additional channels for the real-world training data.
3
Figure 4. Overview of Generation: Our approach generates fractal embedding with the diamond-square method first, then generates
images conditioned on these embeddings. We use RePaint [15] to stitch the images together into a dense RGBD map. The RGBD map
can be converted into a 3D point cloud and initialized as a 3DGS model [11]. The 3DGS model is further refined with 2D diffusion priors
using Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) loss allowing realistic rendering from novel views.
3.2. Conditional Diffusion on Zero-shot Features
Underwater robotic images do not come with captions. Ad-
ditionally, annotating underwater data is also exceedingly
challenging and requires a massive expert-level effort. Re-
lying on manual labels would both be costly and difficult
to scale. In light of this, we leverage the foundation vi-
sual model, DINO v2 [20], to extract zero-shot features
from underwater images: for the image data set, we first
generate DINO v2 features and then apply Principal Com-
ponent Analysis (PCA) on the feature set to project high-
dimensional features to the low-dimensional space. This
reduced dimensional feature vector then acts as a descrip-
tor of the contents within the image. Similar ideas have
been explored in LangSplat [24] in which a Variational Au-
toencoder (V AE) [12] is trained to project CLIP [25] fea-
tures onto a low-dimension space. Early work by Zhang et
al. [35] takes a similar approach on seafloor mapping data
with self-supervised training. However, here, by integrating
foundation models, we are not required to train large neural
networks from scratch to extract features, and can instead
apply weights pre-trained on Internet-scale data.
After obtaining a reduced-dimensional feature vector for
each image, we train a diffusion model conditional on fea-
ture vectors, to generate both RGB and depth images.Let us denote the feature vector as
ϕ←PCA(DINOv2 (I)), (1)
where Iis an image and PCA(DINOv2 (·))indicates apply-
ing PCA to the feature vector outputted by the DINO model,
reducing dimensionality. During inference, our conditional
generative model can be expressed as, I∼P(I|ϕ), where
ϕis a visual feature vector we condition upon. Generat-
ing spatially-consistent and yet diverse landscape images,
requires controlling the evolution of ϕover the spatial do-
main, which alters the generative distribution of the terrain.
3.3. Fractal Latent Terrain Generation
An inherent property of naturally-occurring terrains is that
coordinate points that are close in geometric distance should
have similar attributes. The spatial distribution of natural
terrain is often modeled using fractal processes to approx-
imate natural-looking variations. We imbue this inductive
bias into DreamSea through a novel fractal embeddings
framework , which assumes that the latent vectors over the
spatial domain follow fractal processes.
We begin by initializing the latent vectors at the corners
of an arbitrary square region for which we seek to generate
terrain. We seek to sample a latent function Φ:R2→Rd,
where dis the dimensionality of the latent vector after PCA
4
Figure 5. The Diamond-Square algorithm, which recursively in-
terpolates on a spatial grid, is used to generate latent embeddings
in our approach. The red arrows start from the vertices of the ex-
isting square and diamond shapes from the previous iteration, and
point towards the new center points.
reduction. Specifically, Φ(·)outputs a latent vector ϕfor a
given coordinate (x, y), which can then be used to control
the image generation.
The latent function can be seen as a sample from a frac-
tal process, generated from the Diamond-Square Algorithm
applied to estimate the function output over a dense grid that
covers the desired region. Here, the outputs are estimated
recursively through a recursive two step process. First, in
thediamond step we estimate the function value at the spa-
tial mid-points of each square regions using the four corners
of each square - forming four new diamonds. Next, we ap-
ply a square step , to estimate the mid-points of diamond
regions from the corner points of each diamond — forming
squares that subdivided the original square. In each step, we
compute the latent vector values at the centers of square and
diamond shape patterns as the mean of the corner points of
the regions plus some random noise. Let us denote the set
of vertices of a square or diamond shape as the set K, and
the center point of the square or diamond as rc, the latent
vector value at the center is given by
Φ(rc) =1
|K|X
r∈KΦ(r) +sσ,σ∼ N(0,I). (2)
Here, sis a scaling factor that controls the variability of the
landscape. This factor sis gradually decayed. Therefore,
starting with latent vector values at the vertices of a square,
we can recursively estimate latent vector values over the en-
tire square region.
A single iteration of this process, along with illustrated
vertices, is shown in Figure 5. The end result of this step
is a 2D spatial field of latent fractal embeddings that can be
used to conditionally generate a set of images with strong
spatial dependency.
To accomplish this, we train a diffusion model using
RGB images from real underwater imagery augmented with
depth generated using Depth Anything v2 [32]. The result-
ing model is used to generate an RGBD image for each ver-
tex in the spatial latent field and then RePaint [15] is used
to in-fill any gaps between each pair of neighboring images,
to form a spatially consistent map in the form of an RGBD
point cloud.Here, we highlight that the function of images over the
2D spatial domain is drawn from a doubly stochastic pro-
cess. The set of generated images, {Ix}x∈R2, can be con-
sidered as a function drawn from the conditional diffusion
model, which itself is dependent on a latent function, Φ(x),
drawn from a fractal process, governed by the scale factor
s. Specifically,
{Ix}x∈R2∼P(I|Φ(x))|{z}
Diffusion Model,Φ(x)∼P(Φ|s)|{z}
Fractal Process.(3)
We note that the doubly stochastic nature of our image gen-
eration enables highly diverse terrains to be generated.
3.4. 3D Scene Generation via Gaussian Splatting
In this section, we convert the RGBD point cloud generated
in the previous step into a geometrically-consistent 3DGS
model that uses the generated images as a strong prior. The
resulting model provides us with a 3D structure that is dense
and allows for the generation of novel images from arbitrary
viewing poses.
We begin by using the depth channels from the gener-
ated images to initialize 3D Gaussians following the de-
fault method [11]. Then we freeze the 3D positions of
the Gaussian cloud and refine the appearance with 2D dif-
fusion priors. Given a cloud of Gaussians Ginitialized,
each Gaussian giincludes the following attributes: posi-
tionpi, covariance Σi, opacity αiand radiance ci, that
gi={pi,Σi, αi,ci} ∈G. With a subset of Gaussians
N ∈ Gordered along a camera ray, the pixel value in an
image can be rendered from 3DGS models with the follow-
ing rendering equation:
C=X
i∈Nciαii−1Y
j=1(1−αj) (4)
Herepiis initialized from the depths of the generated im-
ages and frozen when optimizing the Gaussians. Our rea-
sons for doing so are three-fold: 1. Our point cloud is al-
ready sufficiently dense; 2. optimizing position often comes
with Gaussian duplication operations leading to memory
overflow for large generated scenes; and 3. supervising
the geometry with an up-to-scale depth diffusion model is
not well studied. We use the Score Distillation Sampling
(SDS) loss introduced in DreamFusion [23] to optimize the
3D Gaussian model from 2D diffusion prior:
∇θLSDS(Ir)≜Et,ϵ
w(t) (ˆϵ(t)−ϵ)∂Ir
∂θ
(5)
hereθis the parameters of Gaussian cloud Gto be opti-
mized, Iris the rendered image; ˆϵandϵare predicted noise
and added noise; tis the timestep in the diffusion process
andw(t)is the weighting function following the implemen-
tation in [23] (parameter yandztin the original paper are
omitted here for brevity).
5
4. Experiments
4.1. Datasets
The results presented throughout the paper are trained on
real-world data collected from four different locations with
three different robot platforms, spanning a time from 2009
to 2024 (see Figure. 6). The Scott Reef and Batemans
datasets were collected from 2009 to 2015 with a Seabed-
class AUV , Sirius, which features a dual-hull design for sta-
bilized imaging underwater. We post-process the raw im-
ages, hosted on Squidle.org , to have normal exposure.
The Hawaii dataset was collected in April 2024 with an
Iver AUV, the torpedo design allowed it to travel long dis-
tances and sample images from the seafloor. The Florida
dataset was collected in August 2023 with a customized
remotely operated vehicle (ROV) equipped with ZED cam-
eras. Each location presents a unique benthic appearance
and is reflected in our model.
Figure 6. Results demonstrated in this paper are trained on data
collected from 4 different sites with 3 different robot platforms.
4.2. Implementation Details
Our model’s implementation is adapted from DDPM net-
works. We train each model on a single NVIDIA RTX4090
GPU with 24GB VRAM for 2000 epochs, with a batch size
of 12. Although the size of each data set differs, it usually
takes∼200 hours to train on a dataset with 10k images, at
the resolution of 224×224. We use the first two main com-
ponents from PCA results on DINO v2 embeddings. From
our empirical study, we find it to be sufficient to describe the
variation in appearance of underwater environments. This
is consistent with the practice in [24, 35].
4.3. Qualitative Evaluation
We train the model on the dataset collected from various
locations capturing diverse underwater appearances. At
a glance, the generated images resemble the real images
well, as shown in Figure 7. The generated relative depth
also aligns well with human perception, indicating that our
training pipeline successfully learns the visual distribution
of real underwater datasets and distills the 3D information
from the depth foundation model.
4.4. Image stitching by inpainting
Given two generated images spatially adjacent to each
other, we stitch them together with RePaint [15]. Within
Figure 7. Our diffusion model is able to output realistic images as
well as depth estimation distilled from depth anything v2 [32].
Figure 8. We find conditional repaint generates heavier boundary
effects than unconditional repaint when blending images together.
the RePaint model, we investigate two approaches: 1) using
the same conditional DDPM network used for generation;
2) training a new unconditional DDPM. The result shows
that both methods can accomplish inpainting on the gen-
erated images. However, the conditional inpainting model
creates heavier boundary effects in the image, while uncon-
ditional inpainting creates fewer artifacts, as shown in Fig-
ure 8. Our hypothesis on this observation is that, for the
conditioned inpaint approach, the neural network inpaints
the image conditioned on both the existing part of the im-
age as well as the latent embedding. Although they are sam-
pled conditioned on the same latent embeddings, the actual
appearance of the existing part may be shifted, creating in-
consistencies when inpainting. The unconditional approach
depends on the existing part of the image, so fewer artifacts
are exhibited at the boundaries between images. The final
results we present integrate an unconditional model to blend
the images together, alongside the conditional image gener-
ation model.
4.5. Latent Controlled Generation
Generating images and maps with latent embedding con-
trol plays a critical role in creating terrain with appearance
aligned with human preference and natural variation. We
6
Figure 9. Examples of image generation conditioned on interpolated DINO embeddings. A smooth transition can be observed.
Figure 10. Interpolating on 2D latent space: we generate diverse
images conditioned latent embeddings interpolated in 2 directions,
and can observe the appearance of generated images gradually
transitioning from sand to reef to corals of different kinds.
demonstrate a smooth image transition over the latent space:
Figure 10 shows images generated with latent embedding
interpolated in a 2D space. We can see how the appearance
of the images smoothly transits along both axes and we can
recognize how the content of the image shifts from reefs to
sands to corals of different kinds. More results are shown
in Figure 9 with diverse underwater scenes of different lo-
cations, which demonstrated that latent embeddings from
VFMs controls underwater image generation smoothly and
can be well aligned with human perception.
We further show the 2D map generated from a fractal la-
tent field. In Figure 11, we start by showing a special case
where the scaling factor s= 0. The latent field is a deter-
ministic, and is no longer drawn from a stochastic process,
but rather exhibits a bilinear form in this case. Rendered
images generated with different latent area show discernible
appearance and show smooth transition and natural blend-
ing as a whole map. Another example is shown in Figure 12,
Figure 11. Latent Controlled Generation (on an Bi-linear latent
map, which is special case s= 0in Diamond-square algorithm)
Figure 12. Latent Controlled Generation on fractal embeddings,
withs= 0.6. Diversity observed even locally.
where the latent field is generated with s= 0.6. We observe
that the added stochasticity injected into the latent process
visibly enhances the diversity of the generated terrain. In
thes= 0 case, the generated patterns repeat locally, while
when s= 0.6, we observe diverse patterns and elevations
even when considering a local region. This locally diver-
sity can be governed by tuning the scale factor s, further
motivating our doubly stochastic formulation.
4.6. Inpainting Patterns
We further compare our inpainting pattern with most in-
tuitive and commonly used patterns, i.e. raster scan pat-
7
Figure 13. Our inpainting pattern is parallelizable, comparing
to common patterns in image generation and robot mapping, i.e.
raster pattern [13] and lawn mowing pattern [10].
Table 1. MSE ↓on CLIP [25]/DINO [20] embedding space eval-
uated on individual dataset Florida (FL), Hawaii (HI), Batemans
(BM) and Scott Reef (SR). DreamSea outperforms as it does not
generate images in a sequentially conditioned order.
FL HI BM SR Ave.
Raster Order [13] 0.055/ 3.44 0.049/3.63 0.039/3.66 0.055/5.34 0.049/4.02
Lawn Mowing [10] 0.054/3.65 0.053/3.34 0.043/4.77 0.066/5.28 0.061/4.24
DreamSea 0.035 /3.46 0.029/2.12 0.030/2.95 0.041/4.48 0.034/3.34
tern [13] and lawn mowing pattern [10]. The raster scan
pattern updates the image space row by row in one direction.
The lawn mowing pattern updates the image space row by
row but in alternating direction, which is commonly used in
robot mapping [10]. In comparison, the inpaint method in-
troduced in this paper is parallizable since the new patches
are less dependent on previous generated patches. Further-
more, we demonstrate that such dependency reduces latent
control accuracy by evaluating the CLIP and DINO latent of
generated image patches (Reference embedding of DINO is
given; for CLIP embedding we generate a batch of refer-
ence image and extract the CLIP embedding as reference).
As shown in Table 1, which tabulates mean-squared error
(MSE) between reference latent and predicted latent. Im-
age patches are generated conditioned on input latent. We
observe that by leveraging fractal embeddings, DreamSea
consistently outperforms baselines that utilize raster scan
and lawn mowing patterns which are sequential. These se-
quential in-painting patterns implicitly assume that the gen-
erated terrain contains auto-regressive dependencies while
our fractal embeddings explicitly accounts for spatial de-
pendencies along both xandy-axes.
4.7. Towards underwater simulation environment
An example of the RGB map as well as the elevation is
presented in Figure 14, both of which can be important
in building a simulation pipeline for underwater perception
and navigation. To better approximate the real world vi-
sual perturbations, we show that water effects [36, 37, 39]
and lighting effects [31, 38] studied in previous studies can
be synthesized into our map, creating more realistic appear-
ance for image rendering.
5. Limitations and Opportunities
Our current model only estimates relative as opposed to
metric scale. The metric scale could optionally be acquired
Figure 14. Elevation map, water effects and lighting effects can be
integrated seamlessly to create realistic renderings.
by auxiliary sensors such as IMUs, calibrated cameras, cal-
ibration targets, or single/multi-beam acoustic sensors.
Viewing angles are only from the top down. Although
the datasets we use are collected with different robot plat-
forms, they are all from top-down view. This is constrained
by the fact that each robot is designed to be passively sta-
ble in a hydrodynamic environment. This work further mo-
tivates the design of new robot and perception systems to
allow for more diverse viewing angles [14].
It will also be useful to generate images which can in-
tegrate partial expert annotations to semi-supervise Dream-
Sea. Determining how to bridge such a system with broader
marine science, biography and geography community is
still an open problem.
6. Conclusion
Generating realistic and diverse underwater terrains and
scene representations has a wide variety of applications,
spanning video games, movies, robotics, and marine sci-
ence. Existing generative methods struggle to generate suf-
ficiently varied and physically accurate underwater images.
To tackle this, we introduce DreamSea , a diffusion-based
generative model which we train on a collection of large-
scale unannotated underwater imagery collected by robots
at different locations. Our approach conditions generation
upon visual latent embeddings extracted using foundation
models. Furthermore, DreamSea imbues spatial awareness
into the generative model via a novel fractal embedding al-
gorithm. The resulting terrain generation allows for the gen-
eration of highly diverse underwater environments, while
considering spatial-dependencies. The resulting terrain vi-
suals and estimated depths are integrated as priors to con-
struct 3DGS models, which provide 3D geometry and en-
able novel-view images to be produced. DreamSea is rigor-
ously evaluated and demonstrates the capability to generate
large-scale hyper-realistic underwater scenes.
8
Acknowledgments
Part of this work was supported by the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration under grant
NA22OAR0110624. Part of this work was funded by
the Office of Naval Research and NA VSEA under awards:
N00178-23-1-0006, N00014-24-1-2301, and N00014-24-1-
2503. The authors thank Corina Barbalata and team at LSU
for their exceptional contributions in developing robot plat-
forms.
References
[1] Sameer Agarwal, Yasutaka Furukawa, Noah Snavely, Ian
Simon, Brian Curless, Steven M. Seitz, and Rick Szeliski.
Building rome in a day. Communications of the ACM , 54:
105–112, 2011. 2
[2] Abdelhakim Amer, Olaya ´Alvarez-Tu ˜n´on, Halil ˙Ibrahim
U˘gurlu, Jonas Le Fevre Sejersen, Yury Brodskiy, and Erdal
Kayacan. Unav-sim: A visually realistic underwater robotics
simulator and synthetic data-generation framework. In
2023 21st International Conference on Advanced Robotics
(ICAR) , pages 570–576. IEEE, 2023. 2
[3] Angela Dai, Angel X. Chang, Manolis Savva, Maciej Hal-
ber, Thomas Funkhouser, and Matthias Nießner. Scannet:
Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of indoor scenes. In
Proc. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
IEEE , 2017. 3
[4] Matt Deitke, Eli VanderBilt, Alvaro Herrasti, Luca Weihs,
Kiana Ehsani, Jordi Salvador, Winson Han, Eric Kolve,
Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Procthor:
Large-scale embodied ai using procedural generation. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:5982–
5994, 2022. 2
[5] Alain Fournier, Don Fussell, and Loren Carpenter. Computer
rendering of stochastic models , page 189–202. Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY , USA, 1998. 2
[6] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing
Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and
Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Commu-
nications of the ACM , 63(11):139–144, 2020. 2
[7] Klaus Greff, Francois Belletti, Lucas Beyer, Carl Doersch,
Yilun Du, Daniel Duckworth, David J Fleet, Dan Gnanapra-
gasam, Florian Golemo, Charles Herrmann, et al. Kubric: A
scalable dataset generator. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pages 3749–3761, 2022. 2
[8] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising dif-
fusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information
processing systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020. 2, 3
[9] Eduardo Iscar, Corina Barbalata, Nicholas Goumas, and
Matthew Johnson-Roberson. Towards low cost, deep wa-
ter auv optical mapping. In OCEANS 2018 MTS/IEEE
Charleston , pages 1–6, 2018. 2
[10] Matthew Johnson-Roberson, Oscar Pizarro, Stefan B.
Williams, and Ian Mahon. Generation and visualization of
large-scale three-dimensional reconstructions from underwa-
ter robotic surveys. Journal of Field Robotics , 27(1):21–51,
2010. 8[11] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk ¨uhler,
and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time
radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 42
(4), 2023. 2, 3, 4, 5
[12] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding varia-
tional bayes. stat, 1050:1, 2014. 2, 4
[13] Tianhong Li, Yonglong Tian, He Li, Mingyang Deng, and
Kaiming He. Autoregressive image generation without vec-
tor quantization. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems , pages 56424–56445. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2024. 8
[14] Xinyi Liu, Tianyi Zhang, Matthew Johnson-Roberson, and
Weiming Zhi. Splatraj: Camera trajectory generation with
semantic gaussian splatting, 2024. 8
[15] Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher
Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool. Repaint: Inpainting
using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 11461–11471, 2022. 3,
4, 5, 6
[16] B.B. Mandelbrot. The Fractal Geometry of Nature . Henry
Holt and Company, 1983. 2
[17] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthe-
sis.Commun. ACM , 65(1):99–106, 2021. 3
[18] Gavin S P Miller. The definition and rendering of terrain
maps. In Proceedings of the 13th Annual Conference on
Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques , page 39–48,
New York, NY , USA, 1986. Association for Computing Ma-
chinery. 2
[19] Ra ´ul Mur-Artal, J. M. M. Montiel, and Juan D. Tard ´os. ORB-
SLAM: a versatile and accurate monocular SLAM system.
IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 31(5):1147–1163, 2015. 2
[20] Maxime Oquab, Timoth ´ee Darcet, Th ´eo Moutakanni, Huy V .
V o, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez,
Daniel HAZIZA, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby,
Mido Assran, Nicolas Ballas, Wojciech Galuba, Russell
Howes, Po-Yao Huang, Shang-Wen Li, Ishan Misra, Michael
Rabbat, Vasu Sharma, Gabriel Synnaeve, Hu Xu, Herve Je-
gou, Julien Mairal, Patrick Labatut, Armand Joulin, and Pi-
otr Bojanowski. DINOv2: Learning robust visual features
without supervision. Transactions on Machine Learning Re-
search , 2024. Featured Certification. 3, 4, 8
[21] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion mod-
els with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-
ternational Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages
4195–4205, 2023. 2
[22] Ken Perlin. An image synthesizer. In Proceedings of the
12th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interac-
tive Techniques , page 287–296, New York, NY , USA, 1985.
Association for Computing Machinery. 2
[23] Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Milden-
hall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion. In The
Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions . 3, 5
[24] Minghan Qin, Wanhua Li, Jiawei Zhou, Haoqian Wang, and
Hanspeter Pfister. Langsplat: 3d language gaussian splatting.
9
InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 20051–20060, 2024.
4, 6
[25] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning
transferable visual models from natural language supervi-
sion. In International conference on machine learning , pages
8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. 3, 4, 8
[26] Alexander Raistrick, Lahav Lipson, Zeyu Ma, Lingjie Mei,
Mingzhe Wang, Yiming Zuo, Karhan Kayan, Hongyu Wen,
Beining Han, Yihan Wang, Alejandro Newell, Hei Law,
Ankit Goyal, Kaiyu Yang, and Jia Deng. Infinite photore-
alistic worlds using procedural generation. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition , pages 12630–12641, 2023. 2
[27] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz,
Patrick Esser, and Bj ¨orn Ommer. High-resolution image
synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition , pages 10684–10695, 2022. 2
[28] Jingyu Song, Onur Bagoren, Razan Andigani, Advaith
Sethuraman, and Katherine A. Skinner. Turtlmap: Real-time
localization and dense mapping of low-texture underwater
environments with a low-cost unmanned underwater vehi-
cle. In 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intel-
ligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 1191–1198, 2024.
2
[29] Jingyu Song, Haoyu Ma, Onur Bagoren, Advaith V . Sethura-
man, Yiting Zhang, and Katherine A. Skinner. Oceansim:
A gpu-accelerated underwater robot perception simulation
framework, 2025. 2
[30] Jiaxiang Tang, Jiawei Ren, Hang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, and Gang
Zeng. Dreamgaussian: Generative gaussian splatting for ef-
ficient 3d content creation. In The Twelfth International Con-
ference on Learning Representations . 3
[31] Xiaohao Xu, Tianyi Zhang, Shibo Zhao, Xiang Li, Sibo
Wang, Yongqi Chen, Ye Li, Bhiksha Raj, Matthew Johnson-
Roberson, Sebastian Scherer, and Xiaonan Huang. Scalable
benchmarking and robust learning for noise-free ego-motion
and 3d reconstruction from noisy video. In ICLR , 2025. 8
[32] Lihe Yang, Bingyi Kang, Zilong Huang, Zhen Zhao, Xiao-
gang Xu, Jiashi Feng, and Hengshuang Zhao. Depth any-
thing v2. Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems (NeurIPS) , 2024. 3, 5, 6
[33] Taoran Yi, Jiemin Fang, Junjie Wang, Guanjun Wu, Lingxi
Xie, Xiaopeng Zhang, Wenyu Liu, Qi Tian, and Xinggang
Wang. Gaussiandreamer: Fast generation from text to 3d
gaussians by bridging 2d and 3d diffusion models. In CVPR ,
2024. 3
[34] Ziwen Yuan, Tianyi Zhang, Matthew Johnson-Roberson, and
Weiming Zhi. Photoreg: Photometrically registering 3d
gaussian splatting models. CoRR , abs/2410.05044, 2024. 3
[35] Tianyi Zhang and Matthew Johnson-Roberson. Learning
cross-scale visual representations for real-time image geo-
localization. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 7(2):
5087–5094, 2022. 4, 6[36] Tianyi Zhang and Matthew Johnson-Roberson. Beyond nerf
underwater: Learning neural reflectance fields for true color
correction of marine imagery. IEEE Robotics and Automa-
tion Letters , 8(10):6467–6474, 2023. 8
[37] Tianyi Zhang, Qilin Sun, and Matthew Johnson-Roberson.
Learning neural reflectance fields for true color correction
and novel-view synthesis of underwater robotic imagery.
IROS PIES Workshop , 2023. 8
[38] Tianyi Zhang, Kaining Huang, Weiming Zhi, and Matthew
Johnson-Roberson. Darkgs: Learning neural illumination
and 3d gaussians relighting for robotic exploration in the
dark. 2024 International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS) , 2024. 8
[39] Tianyi Zhang, Weiming Zhi, Braden Meyers, Nelson Dur-
rant, Kaining Huang, Joshua Mangelson, Corina Barbalata,
and Matthew Johnson-Roberson. Recgs: Removing water
caustic with recurrent gaussian splatting. IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters , 10(1):668–675, 2025. 8
[40] Jiaxi Zheng, Guangmin Dai, Botao He, Zhaoyang Mu,
Zhaochen Meng, Tianyi Zhang, Weiming Zhi, and Dixia
Fan. Rs-modcubes: Self-reconfigurable, scalable, modular
cubic robots for underwater operations. IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters , 10(4):3534–3541, 2025. 2
[41] Weiming Zhi, Haozhan Tang, Tianyi Zhang, and Matthew
Johnson-Roberson. Unifying representation and calibration
with 3d foundation models. IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters , 9(10), 2024. 3
[42] Weiming Zhi, Haozhan Tang, Tianyi Zhang, and Matthew
Johnson-Roberson. Simultaneous geometry and pose estima-
tion of held objects via 3d foundation models. IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters , 9(12), 2024. 3
10